cool and we're live again um
so i hope you had a good short break
and uh so welcome again to our final
um session which will be on
uh publishing data and i can make this
maybe a bit
bigger okay
um right so in this section we want to
talk about how you can
actually publish your data and share
your data
sets with people and collaborate on um
data sets and um so you did all your
nice
version control and used containers and
created
your script and your results and awesome
figures and now you want to bring it out
into the world
and um now actually
thanks to data that you can make use of
the
wide range of different types of hosting
servers
and storage solutions where you can put
your data and in this session
we want to highlight a couple
of workflows that you can use to publish
your data and collaborate with other
people
um through these platforms and um go
through
um one particular workflow that is
especially geared towards resources we
use at the mpi in berlin
that can be used by you for your next
datalat
project as well so um
just to um as a general instructor
introduction
in general if we think about data
we would like to be in a position where
we can share data just like source
code so maybe some of you have used git
before
or have used github before to share code
with other people or
just back up their own code basically
and
we actually want to do want to be in the
position to do the same thing with data
and also
use the data that and git infrastructure
to to to do the same um like we do with
our source code
um and just like um kind of a regular
um code in a git repository data sets
can also be
cloned and pushed updated
from into local path or
any remote hosting service or other
external special remotes
so you can see some of the relevant
data that commands here so usually you
have
the data set on your local machine or
maybe on your
compute cluster and then you want to
publish to a different place which
could be github or git lab
or some other hosting solution
and there are like i said in beginning a
variety of different
storage solutions like dropbox or google
drive
or gin that we briefly talked about in
the beginning
and um so there are different data
commands that can be used for that
um like for example um the data let
publish command which like adena pointed
out is a
slightly older command which nowadays is
called
data lab push and in the data that
language
just to austin it could get confused in
the data that language
when we talk about remotes so instances
of
our data set that exists in a different
place other than our local
our local workstation are called
siblings
so um you will notice that sometimes we
use
these these terms sibling and remotes
interchangeably
and i'm also happy to be corrected if
that's actually not true but
that's how i always understood siblings
and remotes um
and likewise to consume data
not only to publish data yourself but
to consume data from others um there are
several a set of other commands like for
example the data that clone command
that you that ardena showcased before
where you can
um clone a data set from a remote
repository
and the data.update command that you can
use to
update your data set for example like
adina nicely showed
when the input data has changed and you
want to get the most recent version of
the data set
um so um
you have um um with this with data lab
you have this flexibility
to um have different type of access
options
and um and store your annexed file
context
on different type of storage solutions
and storage locations
um and the great thing about datalab
is that data is really built to maximize
interoperability
that means you can really make use of
different
hosting solutions and storage
technologies and
can you and can even use them at the
same time so you don't necessarily need
to decide
from one storage solution at the
beginning but you could for instance
start with one storage solution but then
move to a different storage solution or
use a set of different storage solutions
at the same time
and always push updates um
between these different data sets um
exactly um so for example just um
to explain what some of these logos were
uh
to be super honest i actually don't know
all of these logos myself
but you might spot several of them like
fixture at the top
open euro a very common platform to host
your imaging data
um gitlab um dropbox
the osf gin or even google drive github
etc
um all right
um so let's get a bit more into the
details and concepts of publishing
yet so usually it would start like this
you create a data set on your computer
so at some point you will ask yourself
how can i share it or collaborate on
this data set
um so down below here you can see
your data set on your workstation or
some server that only exists locally in
one place
so a general distinction that is
important to understand
when using data for publishing is that
there are
repository hosting services like
for example bitbucket gitlab github
or gin and um
then there are third-party storage
providers
um like the ones you can see on the
right like dropbox
um osf etc and um
exactly and the important distinction
here is
that most public data sets that you will
encounter or maybe publish yourself
will have separated the contents that
are stored in git
and the contacts that are stored in git
nx
behind the scenes or you make this
explicitly or make these choices
explicitly um so in general
um exactly so in general
um the content that is stored in git and
just to remind you what this is this
includes the data set history
commit messages run records all the
files that you committed into git
usually
this will include all the code that you
have in the data set
um files that you um didn't put into the
git nx
um like for example um yeah identity
hashes storage locations that
um like it's set here um the
these information will be um
will be shared through these repository
hosting services
and these repository hosting services
they usually don't
have annex support so they can store
these um
nx files which are usually these bigger
files that you have in your data set
um and or can't really hold this data
on this larger data um for free um
instead what this um repository hosting
service today
can nicely show um this git history and
all the files that are stored in git
and also show you how data sets can be
cloned and thereby consumed
so in contrast um the get annex context
content that goes to a different
location
um are all the files that are stored in
the in the annex and are organized in
this
object tree git annex object tree of the
data set so if you've
to make this more concrete if you think
about mri data for example
usually all your mri data will be
annexed
and this data will not go to github or
gitlab
or one of these other repository hosting
services but instead
we'll go to one of these storage
solutions here on the right
and these storage hosting solutions
they usually don't have git repository
support
so you don't have a nice interface or
website like github that you can
go to where you can see kind of the
outline and the structure of the
repository
um but they really only store um this
object tree
with file contents that um
actually looks often very looks a bit
weird to you because it's like weirdly
named folders and files
and um you can't really make much sense
of it
without knowing um kind of what it is
and how it relates to your data set
um and um importantly
datalet keeps track of where the data is
stored so on which of these storage
hosting services you put
your annex data and this data let get
command
that we um talked extensively about
before
um this can then retrieve these file
context
from contents from the special remote so
then you have it all again
in one place
all right
exactly so um
just to make this typical case um more
clear
so the data set itself is usually
exposed through a
private or public repository on the repo
on the repository hosting service
like i said um one of these services
like kitlab and github
but the data can't be stored there so
it's kept in any of these third-party
storage solutions
um and importantly what comes up here in
the middle now
um is also an important concept
concerning the question
how these two things are actually linked
if they are separated
how do you kind of keep this link
between them and
you can configure what are so-called
publication dependencies
so um when you data when you push the
data and you have
um set a publication dependency then
data let in one go in one
push will push the um
information about the repository to the
repository hosting
service and at the same time push the
annexed contents
to the data storage solution in one go
through this publication dependency
so the publication
to github for example depends on a
simultaneous push to your storage
solution
and we will make more clear in one of
the workflows how this is done exactly
um exactly there we go publication
dependency
um one way to configure
such a publication dependency um is
by using the git config command and then
in your remote that you configure so the
hosting service that you use
um to configure um a datalet um
data publish publishing dependency in
this case for example
g drive um another way did we include
here
no is you can specifically configure the
siblings
um by a data led siblings command which
we will show later when we
showcase one of the workflows
all right um
do you want to say something about that
i don't know the yeah
that's just to illustrate how the uh
what you
what you nicely explained as um having
all of this
set up in in the background or behind
the scenes is completely visible to
whomever
consumes your data sets once you have
all of this configuration set up
um it doesn't matter whether your data
lives on a web server
lives on g drive lives in the open
science framework
the data that get retrieves the files if
you allow a specific user to retrieve a
file
from wherever the data actually comes
from
and there's no need to to know where
that is
as a provider of a data set you can make
sure that it always works so if you
clone let's say
all any of the open neural data sets
that are exposed by github
um their data actually lives on as three
buckets
uh this data set uh that we're cloning
that i think
lives on a web server somewhere and uh
yeah
exactly um so in this case acadiana said
for this particular data set the data is
on server
um for um it's very easy for public
repositories um
like i said you can configure everything
in the background so that a consumer of
your data set can
easily get the data um sometimes for
um at least i noticed this for private
repositories it can be a bit tricky and
you need to
invite people to certain storage
solutions
um so that they can then access um your
data
but we will show this uh later in one of
the example workflows
um
exactly so there are do you wanna say
anything about this
sure you go
sorry okay no worries um
so there are some special cases um that
we discussed in the beginning
also someone asked earlier about
the hosting service gin explicitly so
there are some
repositories that have git nx support um
for example gin and also the openscience
framework
so they can basically do both so like i
said in the beginning usually it's
separated the
repository hosting service and the
storage solution
um but some some of these services um
provide both
so for example gin um can
um is a good gitlab ins
or gitlab instance with enabled annex
support
this can hold both your repository and
your data
for free thereby also expose not only
the git history
but also the actual annex contact that
you can also
view for example directly through their
web interface
and datasets can be directly cloned from
there
and it's german servers so so if you
have
data usage agreements that require you
to
publish the data only on german german
german servers
then that may be a really really really
easy
solution where there's a gif later that
shows how it's done
it's just a couple of clicks and a
couple of commands and then you can
publish it
and then it has like the very first time
leonard and i got in touch
we took 20 minutes to publish 500
gigabytes of his neural imaging data to
to jin i think yeah exactly
and mike in the chat already pointed out
earlier that
um it's actually very cool this gin
service
and at the moment it's still free um
let's
hope that this doesn't change in the so
near future
and we can all publish lots of data to
gin
um all right so
um
what's about this so yeah so for example
you can also publish both components to
a special remote
um there are specific data data
extensions for example the
datalet osf extension that can
push the nx contents and get history
to osf and
in this case the git repository
will be published in conjunction with
the annexed files
and then you can clone directly from the
special remote and
osf is a good example and um which some
people might also know
and use
um i can probably quickly walk through
this
um because that just highlights how easy
it is to publish to gin so what you can
see on the lower hand side is that i
went to gingginot.org
and created a new repository and in this
terminal i have created a new data
set and added a comic and just did some
annexed contents
when i take the ssh url of the gen
repository
and give it to a data that siblings add
command where i supply
a name as gin and the url i can add
this gin repository as a sibling data
set
and with a single data that push to that
sibling
i not only publish the git aspect but
also the nx data of the data set and if
i
reload this web page then you can see
that the complete repository including
the nx content is there
and because jin has fantastic web
rendering
it even displays pdfs pngs and so forth
that you
have annexed and pushed there uh right
there so
if you want to publish data and you want
to really just be fast and quick then
then you can use
in that's it's super super awesome
uh later the publication routine that
leonard and i will showcase is more
complex
and uh we took um we wanted to
highlight how you can make existing
infrastructure work even though if it it
isn't as
easy as as on-gen but still very doable
and if you click one slide further then
i can also work through the osf slide
so let's say you want to also publish to
the osf
because open science framework is
frequently used
you can install data let osf as a data
extension
and then use the datalit create sibling
osf command with the title here it's
comics and a sibling name
and that will create a new project on
the open science framework under your
user account
with the title that you've given it and
it configures
a publication dependency per default on
this project and if you then do a data
that push
then it will publish your git history
and your nx data to the open science
framework
if you do it in the default way you will
get
a non-familiar view of the data set
which is due to that being
a non-git repository hosting service so
if you
uh push and then reload the web
interface you will see
that there is a git directory
and that there is an object tree
um that is this this
character hash that you have seen in the
sibling that i've shown before
that is actually that comic so that view
is is untypical you will see how it will
be
a normal view again once you clone that
and i also want to highlight and i've
pasted the documentation with tutorials
into the chat
that there are other modes that you can
use the datalit creates a windows app
command with
that for example can create a snapshot
of the data set that looks just like a
data set on osf
um and if you're interested in using the
open science framework then the
data that osf documentation has um has
tutorials
and i also want to shout out the awesome
people that did this because we hacked
together the extension the data that
was after extension during the ohbm
hackathon during three days
in which none of us slept i think but
there were eight really motivated people
from all over the world that just took
data led and extended it to work with
the open science framework
and that's so if you have another
storage provider
which you would like to use um then it
may be
actually um doable to just implement it
in the form of a datalite extension
and if you open up an issue on the data
that get happened
and just tell us about your needs then
maybe there is
another hackathon where we can just make
it possible oh
um thank you edina so
um now we just briefly want to
talk about what cloning
of data data that data sets means and
how
cloning data sets fields for fields like
for a consumer
so one way one very simple way
that you can kind of clone data sets is
just also on your local machine so
um you can on your local machine you can
clone data sets from any other location
on that same
system and then get also get the files
from this local path um that's very
simple and you don't need any
um third-party storage solution to do
that
um but then there's an explicit link
between these two locations on your
local machine
you can also clone from a server or
cluster
which depends a bit i guess on the
cluster solution that you
that you have but you can basically um
provide the path or the
or would you say url um to the
um class to your cluster and then data
get
files from there um maybe to mention
here
so with our cluster i did this maybe a
bit
um effortful workaround to push to some
remote repository and then clone
um back to our cluster but that also
works
um so basically going through some
third-party storage solution
but that's actually neat because then
you can very easily
prepare a data set on your local machine
and
maybe write some code that is supposed
to run in the cluster then
you push your data set um to the cluster
and can send off your jobs um that are
happily running there
and then you can save the content and
clone back to your local machine and
then continue with whatever you want
um all right um
then the next step would be cloning from
a remote url
so in this case you would
would consume a data set that you found
for example
on github or gitlab or that you know of
and
you can again use the data.clone command
and provide the url
um to the repository um adina has shown
this
to you today multiple times and
if the data set is configured properly
then with the data that get command you
can automatically get
the nx contents from whichever
storage solution this particular data
set
um uses um sometimes it depends
um it needs it may need some additional
configuration
but hopefully the people who provide the
data set also provide this information
to you
a decent sum read me if it doesn't work
out of the box so the same
um yes
look at those special cases where i just
wanted to showcase how how cloning
from jin and osap looks like uh here i'm
logging into our cluster so that i'm not
going to the same computer i created it
on
but on jen it's a data that clone
with the url that i can copy paste
from the repository if i take a look
into the dataset contents i have the
comic
that's not there and the data that get
retrieves it right from jin
super super fast uh note that i'm using
ssh
to do this and that would require a user
account but you can also do https and
there's a tutorial that i've pasted in
the chat
that demonstrates that thoroughly with
so anonymous https access
and if you could click to the next slide
that's data.osf where it's a little bit
different
so in order to clone a repository from
the osf you need the datalite osf
extension
and you give it a weird type of url
which is osf
colon slash and then the project your
the project id of your project on the
osf
and then you can clone that from this
particular special type of url into
uh hopefully a different path that you
provide so that you have a readable
data set and when you then take a look
into the data set then you have your
familiar view
so although it looks weird in this
type of storage sibling that we have
created
at at the open science framework once
you clone it
it looks completely normal again and
then you can
retrieve the data with the data that get
also without um
without any any uh any problem
but there are also so if you're if
you're using the open science framework
frequently
um there are other modes that you can
use the open science framework
um and uh i encourage you to just to
just check it out whether there's
something that suits your workflow so if
you want to showcase
data in not an object tree then you can
also just export the data in a view that
is more familiar to the people that you
work with
okay that's thanks thanks
um all right and
now we're gonna talk about a specific
um workflow um that is geared towards
resources that already exist at the
mpi berlin but for those of you who are
not at the mpi villain don't worry like
it's a very the similar very similar
workflow
can also be used if we if you want to
configure
any other um storage solution
and in this case we are going to
share data via a c file
and c file is essentially
a cloud storage solution very similar
to dropbox and when this workflow in
this demonstration
we're going to show you how you can set
up a very easy
um collaborative workflow on data with
data that
and share your data um
through this storage solution
so um
and this also meant a bit as kind of a
kind of demonstration to wrap up some of
the commands that you noticed before
so um the first step if you remember
is um to create a new data data set
and you may have noticed throughout our
workshop that we
um really like uh cartoons so
um of course the example is a data set
where we create a cartoon collection and
you can see the common data.create
command that
creates a directory on my desktop
called katrin collection and i
go into this directory and use
the wget command that you also already
know to
download an xkcd
comic um and i save it
um to the data um with a helpful commit
message
um and now i'm wondering i have this
cartoon collection
i mean it's only one cartoon yet
but this cartoon is actually already
quite funny so i really want to share it
with
my friend adina how am i going to do
that
so now i need to think about how to
publish with
datalat and um i know that my
institution
um the mpi or the max planck society
in general um has a very cool service
that i actually only recently learned
about
which is c file or keeper so cfa is the
storage solution and keepers the name
they give it
and keeper offers one terabyte of
flexible storage
to all my splunk employees and i was a
bit shocked when i heard it for the
first time because
that's a lot of storage space um that
one can use and i didn't know about that
um so there's the footnote even if you
don't end up
um using data that um and i would be
very sad
if this would be the case but
nonetheless even if you don't end up
using datalet that
make sure to get those one terabyte of
storage space and then do whatever else
you want to do with it
it can be essentially configured like
dropbox um so you can also use it in
that way
and also the data on keeper
because it's a max planck service it's
not a max planck
service so also your data protection
officer will be pleased
because he or she knows that your data
is in a safe place
all right so i'm gonna share want to
share via a c
file um so let's take a look how this is
done
so first of all you need um an account
for keep or c file that's very easy you
can just
register with your mpi credentials
then we also know because i showed you
in the beginning that
with data that usually um the repository
hosting and the data hosting is on two
different locations
we want to create a github or gitlab
repository to
host the metadata and all the content
that is not stored in gitmix
and then for um for to work with
c file and actually other storage
solutions
we need to install another tool called
our clone and the git annex
remote rclone wrapper to make our clone
usable with gitanex
and data that uses this rclone tool
to kind of transfer or push data
to this c file special remote
um and we won't go into details how you
can install these things
they are documented in the data.handbook
how to install our clone in the gitanix
remote rclone wrapper and
this is also might also be um platform
specific so we won't go into the details
of the installation here
but just showcase the workflow in
general um
okay this should be pretty known to you
um
at this point so you can just create
a repository a new repository um on
gitlab for example so this here is a
screenshot of the
local gitlab instance of the mpib so i
create a repository called
comic collection and i can decide if i
want to make it
public or private i can do the same
thing on github
this is a screenshot of how it looks on
github but it looks very similar as you
can see
um all right so first i'm gonna
configure this rclone remote
to use with data latin c file
so if i type rclone in my arc clone
config in my terminal
i can select to configure a new remote
by pressing
n then i give
this rclone configuration a name and
since you're configuring a c file remote
it's a good idea to name it c file or
keeper if you want so i chose
c file in this case um
and then arclone would show you
different options
for storage solutions that you can
that you can configure um in this iclone
configuration
and um you can see here i actually had
to truncate the list
of all the different storage solutions
that are possible to configure with
rclone
um you can see in the list for example
dropbox amazon drive
and actually the very last option option
38 in fact
is c file that i then select
and as a next step um our clone the
action configuration
asks us to enter the url of
the c file host and in this case this is
just the
regular web url of keeper
so i include it here and press enter
then i enter my email address
so the one that is associated with your
keeper account
obviously you should enter your email
address and not mine
and you need to provide a password
which i'm not going to show you and
um then there are several other other
options so you can enable two-factor
authentication um if you want to i
don't do it here um then there's a
kind of tricky or um part to watch out
for
um arclone asks you to enter a
library name so this is the name of the
library
as it will show up on keeper um think
about it as a regular
folder on keeper um similar when you
when you transfer data with dropbox for
example there's a folder in your dropbox
account
and um we actually don't give it a name
here
because um we want to just configure one
rclone remote for our c file or keeper
account
and that we can then reuse across
projects and i'm going to show you in a
bit
how this works exactly so at this stage
we don't provide
library name so we just leave it blank
um we can actually encrypt the library
if we want to to make things super safe
for my cartoon collection i don't really
mind so i don't
enable encryption here um you can just
press
enter all right
then comes the last interesting bit
which is the advanced
configuration so rclone asks you if you
want to edit the advanced confusion
and you press yes um and then
rclone asks you if arklun should create
a library if it doesn't exist yet and
in this in this argument you set to true
and this relates back to the comment i
met earlier about the name of the
library
so here when you set this option to true
then if you push data to c file via this
rclone configuration
rclone will automatically create the
corresponding folder
on keeper for you which then means
that um you can reuse the same
configuration
for a different repository and rclone
will then
generate or create a new folder on
keeper for this other project
um then there's one last bit about the
encoding
which we can just keep at the default um
value and
don't worry so much about it
and we're done that was easy right so we
get this summary
of um the rclone remote that we um
configured
and also a list of the road remotes that
we configured overall
so in this case it only lists um two uh
one remote
namely the c5 remote
and don't get confused because
we named the remote c file and the type
of storage is also c file
um so that's why sd5 comes up here twice
[Music]
if you're a bit impatient then
you can also do this in one go basically
in one
line of code with all these
arguments and actually now i'm exposing
my
password to you you can try if it works
um maybe not um
but this is basically um the same
configuration
um just in one line of code and you
don't need to go through all these steps
whatever you prefer um
all right um that's about the rclone
configuration
um so then
what's kind of remaining is we need to
initialize
this rclone special remote that we just
configured so this configuration
for now just exists on your local
machine and we need to initialize it
for our data set and for this
um we're going to use this command which
is also documented in the datalit
handbook
um which is the git annex init remote
command
and um we give it a name and
this name again it's
a good idea to name it the same like the
arcturum configuration so we again name
it c file um
the other um the second line of code is
um a kind of default value so it's an
external
storage type and without encryption the
target
that this target argument specifies the
rclan remote that you just configured
and remember we
called it c file so again you need to
put c file here
if you named it differently for example
keeper then you need would need to keep
put keeper here and finally
we set the pr prefix and this is the
name of our data set
and this will be the name of the library
on keeper
where keeper will push the nx content
into so this relates back to our
previous settings
that we allowed our clone to um
create a library on its own and also
where we didn't specify the library name
because by
by specifying the prefix here um
when we push to a c file
our clone will automatically create this
library on keeper for us
and we don't have to do it manually
exactly like i said before it's helpful
to be consistent with the naming to not
be confused
and i told you about the prefix and
then we can see kind of the output of
this operation
init remote c file okay recording state
and git
and if we use the datalab um
if you use the database siblings command
you
can see that there are two siblings or
remotes
um configured for this data set so kind
of locations where data knows
um this data set exists one is here
the location on your local computer and
the other one is c
file um with our clone as
the service that we use to
publish our nx content
all right um
so how do we so before we talked about
this publication dependency and that we
need to make sure
that the structure of our repository is
published
to our repository hosting services like
github or gitlab
and that the annex content goes to our
storage solution in this case c file
so now we need to add the gitlab or
github
sibling or remote and that's very easy
um with datalet as well so in this case
we use the datalet siblings command
and we do dataled siblings add and then
we give um
then we specify the name of this new
sibling
in this case i chose origin we provide
the url in this case
i'm using the ssh url
to the gitlab repository that i just
created before
on the gitlab website and here
we explicitly set this publication
dependency
by adding this dash dash publish depends
c file which is our iclone remote and
you can see some output and then you can
see that
that this t
file um or that the gitlab origin
sibling is was configured um correctly
and when we do the datalet siblings
command again which lists all the
available siblings
we can also see this origin appearing
here
if you wonder about the plus and minus
you see next to the siblings
that basically means if um
the remote or the sibling has annex
support or not and
we know that locally we can have our
annex data
on our clone we can have our nx data but
the origin on gitlab
is just the repository hosting provider
and does not have any support
short quiz question um why do you think
uh did i name the gitlab um
sibling origin um
so the i'm actually not gonna wait for
answers um i'm just gonna tell you the
solution directly
if you if you clone a repository from
let's say gitlab or github
um you may have noticed before if you
for example use git before
that the the name of this of this remote
in kind of git language
is um usually called um origin
so basically um when i already when i
create the sibling in the first place
i already name it origin and not
something else
because if i later cloned to a different
location
no matter which name i gave it now when
i created the sibling
um the first time it will if i clone it
to a different location
it will again be called origins this is
just this uh
git standard and um even with this
um local version of the data set where i
configured the sibling
um the first time i don't want to be
confused um
with these origin with these sibling
names so just call it origin in the
first place
all right um so finally we did
all this um very exhausting and
extensive configuration
and now let's see if we're rewarded um
so
finally we can push our data
and so we do datalet push and we specify
the sibling that we want to push our
data to
in this case origin and remember we set
the publication dependency
so what happens is the data that is so
super smart
when we push to origin it will push
the repository contents like
our git history all the stuff that we
talked about before it will push this to
git lab
and um but uh copy or push
the annex content in this case the xkcd
comic that i added to the repository at
the beginning
it will push this to our c file remote
and store the nx content there and
we can see that it worked so that was
successful and we're super happy about
this um
and also something to keep in mind is
that
um i didn't talk about collaboration yet
right
this was just a step to push my data set
or my annex content to a different
location
which also means that i've just created
essentially a backup of my data set
right
so um if there would be a file now
and or i would lose my laptop i will or
if i would be like the
poor chemistry um student um that lost
his or her laptop
then um i would now have a chance to
retrieve my precious cartoon collection
um
from um c file um or
gitlab or vice versa um by just cloning
my data set again
and i have all my data um back um
so remember in the case of fire um
always
push your data first and then leave the
building
obviously that's not like legal advice
and um you didn't hear it from me
um exactly
remember the poor phd chemistry phd
student
um all right um
we can also check out all these um web
pages like
at the top you can see the keeper
library
and you can see yay the cartoon
collection is there
actually if you go click inside the
cartoon collection um
you can see this weird folder five
one oh what does it mean that's um
actually the
git annex object tree that is um then
stored in this cartoon collection
library on keeper um keeper has this
weird
um habit or algorithm to automatically
add a markdown file and a pdf to every
library
which contains super useful information
how you actually use
a c file um once you've seen it for the
20th time or so you will just delete it
which i usually do manually i don't know
if there's a way to
not have to do this manually but it
doesn't affect your data so
you can also just leave it there um it
doesn't hurt
and we can check out gitlab and you can
see here that on gitlab
you can see my push so add the funny
xkcd comic and we can see the structure
of our repository
with our first cartoon great we
published a data set
to a special remote excellent
all right but remember i really i'm
really only doing this to
be able to share my cartoon collection
with my friend alina
so um what would the person whom i'm
sharing the data set with
would have to do to get this get the
files
um so adina will go into this
in a bit more detail from her
perspective i'm already foreshadowing
here um and you can maybe also imagine
yourself at this point
that it will first involve cloning the
data set
and um i want to pay i want you to pay
special attention
to one output of this data clone command
which is um this here in line five and
um six where data tells me that access
to one data set sibling
is not auto enabled but we can enable it
with this command um so basically
um datalet tells us hey there's a
special remote
but you need to enable it first so and
as you can imagine
to be able to enable the sibling
adina or any other person whom i want to
share this data set with
would need to first of all have access
to the contents on keeper or c file and
then also
enable this special rclone remote using
the same configurations
and then this person can enable the c
file special remote for this repository
and get the annex data so
maybe just to show it to you um
how um enabling access to keeper works
for other people
in this case it's also interesting
because um adina is not at the mpi so
um but i can still share the data set
with her
which might be relevant if you are
collaborating with people
that are not um at the mpi or in the
math bank society
so you can simply go to um
the keeper website and to the repository
and there's a share button somewhere
you can't miss it really and there's an
option to share to user
and i just typed in adina's email
address and she will get a notification
to enable her to also push to the
repository i obviously need to
set read write permissions and that's
one prerequisite that i need to do
and from that on adina can take over
to demonstrate how this looks at
how this looks like at her end um
do we want to switch the uh yeah
probably
i'm taking the presenter from you
um and i'm going to
show you how what i had to do from from
my perspective
and it was actually um actually a very
fun exercise
um so um leonard first of all
um shared the special remote in the
repository with me
um so he's just shown you how he shared
the
uh keeper library with me and i received
an email that conveniently told me
hey then there's a member of the monks
max pranks a society
that has shared data with you and then i
can log in which is a fantastic service
actually from the max prank society and
see
the cartoon collection the library in
uh the libraries that he has shared with
me
and he also sent me a link to his gitlab
uh repository so that i knew
where to go to in order to get
the appropriate repository from the
first time we did this it was actually
quite funny because he he wrote me a
cryptic email
with i challenged you to retrieve this
annexed file
without telling me anything else but
pointing to a
to a git repository which was a fun
thing to do
but here he essentially told me
everything that i needed to know he told
me
that there is a keeper library and that
there is this git repository on a gitlab
instance
and that he has named his uh arclone
uh remote c file so what i
initially did is i started with cloning
the repository from github
and as uh len had already showed you
i got the repository and i could list
the contents of the
repository so this um this png
but at this point it's just the identity
information
it's not actual file content that file
content
is on keeper and i get a data led
siblings
enable command that is tuned to my file
system so
uh when i copy paste this one then i can
enable
the um special remote um but just by
copying and pasting it out of it
the important point for me in this setup
where
um it is it is quite so so there are
other ways to
to do this kind of publication routine
we have just um
fitted it to what is available at the uh
mpim infrastructure there are ways to
make this even easier
but in the case of um the
the external keeper remote um there
i actually need to configure the rclone
software myself
to have that pointed uh to this storage
provider
so i'm just configuring exactly the same
arc long remote as leonard did
i'm configuring a new remote i'm naming
it c
file just to have the exact same name
that's actually
an important thing to do um i
just see file i enter the keeper address
of the mpi
i use now my personal email address
to enable rclone to look into the
libraries that i have in the c file
instance and input my password
i also don't want two-factor
authentication and i also
leave the name of the library blank in
order to have the same configuration
because
probably leonard and i will collaborate
in the future and with that
our clone remote set up and configured
uh he and i can create dozens
hundreds of other repositories and can
then
just get them to work right away without
an additional icon configuration if we
have
such a setup i uh thus also added the
advanced config
i set create library to true i pass on
encoding and i have a configured c file
remote that almost looks identical with
the exception of my user and password
uh as a configured iclone remote and as
a small tip
um lynette shared how to do it in one
line i'm going to
share how you can do it as a text-based
thing
if you're on a unix-based operating
system then rclone saves
all of these configurations in a file in
your home directory in the
config folder it's hidden but you can
just
take a look at it as in any other folder
it's where a lot of
files just save their configuration
files into
and there's an rclone directory with an
archline conf
configuration file where you can just uh
write down the configurations
um in a text editor if you want to
all right so rclone is a fantastic
software in itself
uh so if i let's say uh do an rclone lsd
to list available directories in this
configured remote
c file then it can already show me that
there is this directory cartoon
collection nadine that you have been
granted access to and that you
are now able to retrieve data from so
um now it's actually time to get the
comic so
first i'm going to copy and paste the
datalet siblings command which enables
the c file remote in my clone of
lynette's dataset
and then i can get the comic and success
i can take a look at the comic and
leonard has successfully shared
the data with me and i was able to
retrieve it and that can be a comic but
that can also be
his most recent imaging study on mine
now what i at this point ben thought
that's a cool comic
i really like that one i even have it on
a t-shirt but
man i also know some other cool comics
so
let's go from sharing data to
collaborating
and uh we want to take this this
workshop to to
showcase one um collaborative workflow
that is that is borrowed from the way
that software development uses
collaboration
if you have never used gitlab github or
search repository hosting services or
git in a
collaborative fashion then this can be a
little bit overwhelming
but in my personal opinion it works
well if you use it or hear it once and
then
if you read up on it and just digest it
for a night everything becomes much more
clearer on the next day
and at one point it will make sense and
be very beneficial if you incorporate it
into your own workflows
um so sorry i'm going to hand do you
want to talk i'm just clicking
um i think it's not much actually it's
still on your side of the
collaborative process actually um maybe
just to mention here
so if you want to collaborate with
someone and
um this might be especially important in
cases where
um your data set is maybe still private
because you want to keep it private for
some reason
um then you need to kind of manually add
your collaborators to your repository
in this case i could just go to the
settings of the repository on gitlab
and add a new member to the repo
again i just entered adina's email
address
and gave her you can set
certain role permissions so at which um
level
people can access your repository and
the things they are allowed to do
and um i really trust adina so i gave
her developer
um rights and um
also um i shouldn't forget to also add
her to the
as a collaborator to the c file or
keeper library
as i showed you before which you need to
do through the
keeper web interface
all right so i'm going to walk you
through a typical collaborative workflow
that makes use of the features that
repository hosting services provide
and of the functionality that the
version control tools in a data
dataset provide as a heads-up that's a
a workflow borrowed from software
development that in our opinion
is really really beneficial for
scientific collaboration because
with everything that you're doing you
leave a digital trace of what has been
done
so a typical collaborative workflow
starts
with an issue an issue is a feature that
is provided by the repository hosting
services
and that's a very nice way and good
practice
to keep your collaborators up to date on
what you're
planning to do or on what kind of
problem you're facing
it's a way to give them a heads up and
uh to seek input or feedback or have
discussions out in the open
or if it's not a public repository in a
private repository not so much in the
open
but at least in a place where it's
publicly documented attached to your
project
and uh record for future yourselves
uh and therefore i go to gitlab and i
tell them that hey
thanks so much for sharing your comics
with me or your neural imaging data but
i think i have some additions that i can
make to this
so how about me adding some i can do a
poor request
and leonard can then get an email about
this issue
and say cool that would be great i'm
looking forward to your pr
and i can be confident that my
contribution is worth it and i
work towards adding content to this
repository
so now up for collaboration the first
step that i'm doing
and that is uh something that um
looks weird on first on first side but
it's something that you get used to
quite easily is
you create a new branch in the data set
and leonard has already introduced this
concept of a branch a bit
um and it is good practice to do so
and it also comes from software
development where you not
uh usually develop a new feature or add
code or add data
in the same development line that is the
master or main branch so the main
development line
that makes it easier to incorporate
changes with the trace of where they
came from
that enables easier parallel development
and in many cases
for example with gitlab it is also
necessary
because in the case of gitlab the master
branch is what is
called right protected so i actually
need to create a new branch because i
can't push directly
to the master branch so it's quite easy
sorry
it's quite easy to create a new branch
um one way to do
is with the get checkout b command
that creates a new branch in this case
it's called more comics
and also checks it out so that i'm on
top of that branch and can make my
changes
and then i can add the changes that i
want to do
so in this case get another comic and
save it
um and now um
it's my turn to push back
to the git repository that has been
shared with me
and because i don't want to do two
separate data like push commands
but i want to have it as easy as um
leonard had it when he configured a
publication dependency
i'm going to do the same just to spare
me the two pushes
and um with for this i'm taking another
good look at the siblings that i have
it's origin and c file
and i'm using here the git config
command uh
as an alternative to what leonard has
shown you with the data siblings command
and i configure that publication
dependency
in my local data set where that line of
code basically translates to
when pushing anything to the sibling
remote origin
push changes to the sibling c file first
and once that's configured so here's
another overview i can do
a one time push because i have cloned
from an https url i actually
need to authenticate with my username
and password so this is why i typically
use
ssh keys and then it uploads the git
history the commit message that i
attached the history
of my contribution to uh to to the
repository and it updates the
c file library with the new comic and
then i can create what is called a merge
request
which is um the software development way
of proposing a change for integration
into the main
feature development line um and that is
very very well applicable to science so
if i now go back
to the repository hosting site then
gitlab
very very uh handily tells me
that you post to the branch more comics
at
this repository how about
you go and create a merge request with
the changes that you have pushed
and i can quickly uh and simply push
that button
in order to um enable such a merge
request
it gives me the option to add a title
and a description of what i've done
and once i do this leonard gets an email
and can check out whether he likes my
contribution or not
and if so he can merge it and integrate
my contribution to his repository
okay i'm handing over to you
you should be able to screen channel
all right i also muted can you see it
yeah
all right so actually now
that i enabled my collaborator adina to
work with me on the data set i and i
i got a notification that she
contributed
a merge request and proposes some
changes to my data set
so now as kind of the maintainer of this
data set
i need to review the changes and
see what adina is proposing there so
um i can do this um
again through the terminal like one
command that is commonly used
um is git fetch which
allows you to kind of fetch information
from your
remote repository so from
the gitlab origin to promote
and then i can actually
check out the branch that adina was
working on the more comics branch
i can check it out to my local machine
which means i
switch from the branch i'm currently on
likely the master branch i switch to
adina's
more comics branch that contains her
changes
and you can see here that this switching
of the branch was successful
then actually what i can already do i
can again use the simple ls command to
list
um the files in the directory and um
having just um pushed the compiling
png comic before i noticed oh there's a
new file
um interdisciplinary png that sounds
very exciting
um so what i can already do now since um
even on this branch um the nx contents
have already been
pushed to the um c file remote that
holds the nx data i can simply
data that get this file that doesn't
exist yet on my
own machine and i can look at the comic
and actually i have to say
it's um very funny and um
usually i'm very strict um what is
allowed to go into my
cartoon collection and only the most
funniest cartoons are
allowed to be added to this data set um
this is definitely the case here
so um what i can do now and there again
several ways to do it um i can now
merge um the branch
the more comics branch that adina
created i can merge it into the
main master branch of the data set
i can simply do this through the gitlab
web interface there's also a way to
do this locally on my computer for the
terminal
so here in this case um unfortunately we
can't i
didn't manage to make a screenshot
before i actually merge i was so excited
to
um quickly merge um the branch that i
just pressed and merged so usually
here on the left side there would um be
a green
merge button that you can press and then
um
the the adidas branch will be
automatically merged with the
master branch if i want to i can add
comments to it
for example thank adina for her
contribution
and then if i look at the
commit history so the changes that
happened in this data set over time
i can see here before i merge the branch
into the master branch
there is this commit by adina where she
added
another fun comic what i then
then can actually do back on my local
machine in the terminal i can
check out the master branch again do a
data that update merge
would which kind of gets me
the latest changes from the remote
repository
and if i do ls again this
interdisciplinary png file
also exists on my master branch now
since i just merged it
into the branch and we can use this
tick tool that ardena also mentioned at
some point during the workshop which
again
nicely shows the history of changes to
this data set
and that was the entire cycle of this
collaborative workflow and
we showed you some cool features that
mainly come from the i would say
software development world
where people write issues to propose new
changes
and then actually change stuff
themselves and
propose these changes um to the main
data set via these match requests
and this is a very cool way to
collaborate with people
in a very transparent and organized way
and in our opinion this can be directly
applied
to how we work in science as well
all right but maybe you might feel at
this point that this was
quite exhausting and configuring
this arclun remote this was a bit
daunting
um i'm totally with you um i can tell
you once you
get the hang of it it's actually super
easy to do all this configuration
and it um won't be such a hassle for you
um but you might rightfully ask isn't
there a much easier way to share my data
and just for completeness
we mentioned it several times before gin
is a very great option to share your
data sets and collaborate with people
so um actually
um i would just briefly show um how we
can
within the same data set just simply
configure yet another
um sibling or remote storage solution
that we can use with our data
set so um i go to the gin website and
create a repository which i'm not going
to show here
then um on my machine in the terminal
i simply add a new sibling um for the
general remote so again i do data led
siblings at
um dash s which or dash dash name so i
give it a name in this case
jin might be a good idea and i give it
the url
um and in this case again i'm using
um ssh and that way i configure yet
another remote
and um what i can also do is i just
configure
yet another publication dependency for
my
origin gitlab sibling so i just do data
let's siblings configure
to configure the existing um
origin sibling and again i specify
the c file publication dependency where
i'm actually not sure if this is
necessary because it was already
configured before but nonetheless i do
it again just to be safe
and then i add the publish dependency on
gin and now i actually have two
publication dependencies
how amazing is that and if i do um
a data that push again to origin which
is our
kind of main gitlab repository um data
that will
push the repository structure to gitlab
and it will push the nx content to c
file
and the combination of both to gin and
now i have actually another place where
my data is stored and can be accessed
by collaborators and that's very neat
okay um but now with all this
amazing data led configuration and all
these amazing
remotes and options we have to share
data
you might still say well i use data that
and it's amazing it's really cool but
still
my collaborators they don't want to deal
with data that then i'm very sorry for
you
and your collaborators but don't worry
you can still just let them download the
data set
directly from jin if they want to so if
i have another friend who's not as cool
as adina to
use data led to get my comic collection
then um i can also just um
point this person to the gym website
um and there's a small download button
here on the right
and the person can just simply download
um the entire data set as a zip file
or gen archive whatever and access your
data that way
but of course um you need to tell them
that they are missing
out learning an awesome tool um
but i mean we all know that maybe not
everyone we will collaborate with or
everyone who wants to access our data
um wants to learn about datalet and i
think that's
actually also fair and it's actually
nice that
through gin for example we can give them
the option to access the data in another
way
although we have to maybe point out to
them that they would lose these benefits
of version control and all these
functionalities of
data that um that we can that we use
when we use datalet um
all right that was pretty much it
about this collaborative workflow maybe
just as a very quick summary
um a very typical collaborative webflow
as we just showed
um involves optionally creating an issue
to let your collaborators know
um that you want to propose a change
then you create a new branch in your
data set
um make a change save it then
um do all the configuration to be able
to push to that data set
um and push your changes and you create
a merge request
um what it's called on a gitlab or a
poll request on github
and um you you can um yeah merge all
those changes
and let your data set grow
um all right that was it for
the final section on dataset publication
um i should advance
yeah are there any questions i think i
missed
out on several whoops
i miss out on several comments um
are there any questions
okay cool um
i'm just going to quickly go through the
two questions that are in the shared
notes
just to have them answered so one
question is
using data that run with the script that
takes flags how would i correctly pass
the options for example my script gets
called by a python three script dot pi
np1000 clf svm
usually you will be able to just put
that string into the run
command like that just enclose it in
quotes
and it will work if you have a shell
that maybe
escapes things weirdly you might want to
use single quotes
in order to to have no expansion but
typically
um any flags are fine in the data that
run command um that
that should should work out really well
um
and then when using hpc for which you
submit jobs rather than run a script on
your own machine what is the best
practice to make code reproducible for
someone who does not have the htpc
option has to run script on its own
machine
so that's a really really good question
and that's something that we have been
working on
over the cast past couple of months
because in the inm seven at the
research center we do those
containerized pipelines
on a large scale via a badge scheduler
in our case it's hd condor
and we try to produce a
fair and digital problem so we use data
that run
in parallel with a job scheduler um to
to create a completely fair fair data
set record of how we
pre-processed and analyzed our data and
we have
a workflow sketched out here
in the datanet handbook which is a
chapter
on computing on clusters and there is
a concrete use case with a walk through
and a general introduction to it
with data centric analysis with job
scheduling and parallel computing
and there we lie out all of the steps
that are necessary first of all to make
job submission and parallel computing
work in data like data sets but also
highlight a way that is
agnostic of the infrastructure that you
run it on
the job scheduler that you use it with
because
essentially it boils down to
where is it to having a
shell script submitted as a job that
does nothing
but how you would use data led um
execute that on a branch and execute
that on a compute node
on the job that you submit and that
javascript can run
on a local machine or on a compute node
so also completely independent of high
performance
computing clusters uh or high throughput
computing clusters
okay um let's see
i think andre so andre had a
comment he said i think uh
non-data ladders or non-getters often
don't realize how much extra work they
inflict on
uh themselves and the collaborators what
would you suggest as an argument to
convince them
just from my own experience i mean i can
totally resonate with that
um i actually don't really
have a good answer um
i guess i don't know for me there's no
other do you want to say something about
this no i think i think there's no way
to convince people
like if they don't want to they will be
always pissed about the work that you
inflict on them
and without ever realizing how they can
improve
their workflow whatsoever so if the
people don't want you can you can't make
them want to that's
that's that's unhealthy i would say um
but
uh what i personally like is that there
are
a lot of options where i can personally
if i
make the decision to use git or datalet
or any of those tools
in whatever workflow i want where i can
still share what i'm doing in a way
that's not a data led specific
or data led centric where i can export
stuff and put it on the osf in a view
that people
outside of data that are familiar with
uh just download the gene repository
um just export it to to fix share
everything that's in a data
data set is completely unaffected
basically it's
it's the same file types there's uh you
can get
stuff out of the data that data set if
you want to get it out of there
and um i think that that would be my
answer to that so don't try to
to convince the people that really don't
want to be convinced that's a painful
process
um it's easier for you if you stick to
the people that
that that that are intrinsically
motivated to do so
and if you yourself have the feeling
that this is something that's beneficial
for you then
you can use it in a way that is probably
not going to
enforce it on everyone that you work
with
yeah i agree there were also some useful
comments by michael and
benjamin that yeah just show that you're
more productive
and let them see or um
yeah yeah okay
and maybe maybe i also found that um
like adina said
it's it's still good to provide other
solutions um
that's why i also mentioned this option
to just download um
from gin directly um i mean there are
also other ways like i ate for example
before i had to
get all the i had from a local data set
then i wanted to
send it i think to our network server or
so
but in an unannexed way um so then i
kind of
just copied and resolved all the
siblings of the annex data
and then it was just there without any
um
version control unfortunately but still
there are all these ways how you can
provide people
with the stuff they need and um maybe
you can
just show them interesting tools and
maybe at some point they actually
convince themselves that um it's a great
tool to use and
helpful for them
to use the last five minutes you made it
um
congratulations and kudos for
being with us throughout this very very
very exhausting and long
and intensive workshop um we have
solved hopefully questions but you can
get in touch with us later on
if you slept over it um and so just as a
quick
wrap-up of what have we done first and
foremost we lost
all at least another 1.0.1 die up to
supervision because we stared at the
screen for the whole day
in our basement um leonard and i talked
so much that we will probably stop
talking now for a week if we still have
any voice left tomorrow
and if you're not used to working with
the terminal then chances are high that
you'll dream of one tonight and i'm
terribly sorry for that
and if data led would be cake then we
would have had so much of it today that
we would be diabetic
but um what else did we do we had a
really intensive day
and uh leonard and i hope that we were
able to show you
some of the ways and tools that we
that we use and how we use dataled uh in
our day-to-day science and how that can
make science a little bit easier a
little bit more reproducible
and maybe there was something in there
that
also is useful for you and beyond data
light we've also touched a range of
other useful tools and concepts and we
hope that there was something
for you in there that that you can take
with you
and and read up on or use in your own
work
and so you know now a ton of things
you have heard about version control
concepts collaborative workflows
different types of provenance and ways
to computational reproducibility
you have heard about software containers
and no ways how to use them places to
store and share your data
and how to do it in practice and if
you've never heard about these things
before
then oh my god then this is probably how
you currently feel like
and that's completely fine uh because it
was a lot and it was intensive
and it's always good to have things
repeated multiple times if you
didn't understand things then um sleep
sleep
sleep one night ask questions um if you
hear it again
by someone else then things will become
a lot clearer it's all
a slow and step-by-step process and
things are not easy
but in our opinion they are definitely
worth it and just for a few
take-home messages there are many tools
that make research data management
and science in general easier more
transparent and more reproducible
datalite is one of them it's flexible
and extendable it can be
probably combined with much of what
you're using anyways
and um if much of what we talked about
is new for you
then we have to warn you no start is
perfect things are hard to do
it's a complex achievement that you are
trying to do
um but importantly there is
documentation especially in the data
handbook
and there's a community that you can
turn to if you run into bugs problems or
general questions
if you want to get started with data
land then take small steps take your
time use whatever feature is useful for
you
and if you ever need help have a
question then
get in touch and we're happy to help and
that was it leonard if you want to add
something i
definitely want to add a huge thank you
to you for this phenomenal
uh collaboration that we had organizing
this workshop this was really really fun
and intensive and i'm really exhausted
but thank you
i can really just echo basically
everything you said
and also return the thank
uh thank you to you um it was really fun
um organizing this and also for the
people that supported us
um and the repronam
people that are really a very fun cohort
to exchange with on reproducibility and
of course each and every one of you for
attending and
also providing many interesting ideas
and discussions
um that was a lot of fun and yeah i
really just hope that it's
useful for you and um yeah you learned
something
interesting and new yeah we will make
sure to send out links to
the published recordings to the email
addresses that we have of you
and we can also send the shared notes
and
uh now my voice is actually starting to
fade
so i wish you all a pleasant evening
have a good
night get some sleep thank you